Okay, Ray. Okay, this is Ron Shorn interviewing
Ray Newbern at Jet Propulsion Laboratory at
Pasadena, California on June 16, 1993. Ray, for
the record, what's your full name? Ray Leon
Newbern, Jr. And where and when were you born?
January 9, 1933, Rock Island, Illinois. Okay. How
did you get interested in astronomy in the first
place? I read a Sunday supplement in a newspaper
when I was in the fourth grade, probably at that
time, in the old Herald Examiner, except I guess it
was the Herald Express in those days, before they
combined with the Examiner. Got very excited
about this article about the solar system.
Started asking my folks questions. They didn't
know the answers. Said, you know what you're
supposed to do when you... want the answer to
something, and we don't know the answer, go to the
library. So I started reading books on astronomy,
and the next thing I knew, I was hooked. Okay. Did
you keep that interest in astronomy through high
school? Yes, very much so. Where did you go to high
school, by the way? Glendale High, Glendale,
California. So where did you go to undergraduate
school? Well, just tell me your schooling. I went
to Caltech in September of 1950. Got my bachelor's
degree there in 1954, a master's degree in 55. I did
the coursework for a doctorate. And then in the
summer of 56, I came to work at JPL rather than
continuing as I had in a couple of previous summers
at Mount Wilson Observatory because I was $3,500
in debt and needed the money. JPL offered me twice
as much money as Mount Wilson. So I came to work at
JPL, and it turns out I never went back to school
then. I stayed at JPL, been here just over 37 years
now. What did JPL hire you to do? Well, the first job
I did that I was really looking at seriously was the
flame attenuation of electromagnetic
radiation. They were still doing radio guidance
in those days, and they were concerned about the
radio signals for guidance being attenuated by
the rocket plume. And so it was a problem in pure
physics. There was no real astronomy here, and
that's what I was doing that summer. Was that
Sergeant or Corporal? Actually, in those days, it
was, I think, a concern about both. Both were
certainly... Corporal was in the field, and
Sergeant was still under development.
When did When did JPL start getting interested in
astronomy? Well, the first action that I got
involved in that was really astronomy occurred
when Marsha Neugebauer and I wrote a series of
articles, or articles, but just position papers
on some of the things that we might do in space in
early 1958.
This was in response to Explorer 1 having gone up
and people starting to think ahead as to what it
might be possible to do with these newfangled
rockets and space probes. And the result of that
position paper, which was strictly an on-lab
thing, was that I was made part of a Tiger team set up
by Al Hibbs in the fall of 1958. to formally look
into these problems of what should we do in our
studies of the solar system. And this all finally
resulted in Marsha and I writing the report 30-1,
which was the formal report of Al Hibbs' Tiger
Team, and we did the science section.
Okay, did that report have any, did anything come
out of that? Yeah, I mean, it was accepted by NASA,
and I think it was widely used initially as a sort of
an outline of the things we ought to be attempting
to do in space. And it was very widely used and
quoted for a few years until we began to try to do
some of these things. Found some of them were a
little harder than we thought. But actually, I
think virtually everything in that report we
finally did. Maybe not quite on the time scale we
expected. Took a little longer, but we finally did
it all. When did you get to be able to start to do some
astronomy at JPL? Well, we created an astronomy
group here in, I believe, 1961. People
were convinced that we needed some astronomers
around doing astronomy to maintain, I think,
recognition in the field and to give proper advice
and mostly we were concerned about the fact that
there was almost no planetary astronomy going on
in the United States in those days. We knew that we
were going to need ground-based support of the
space program. No one else seemed willing to do it
so we got the idea well let's see what we can do in a
small way ourselves and when a small 16-inch The
telescope came on the market for, I believe,
$8,000. It was for sale by a private party here in
the basin. I talked the boss into buying it and
housing it. In those days, it was Al Hibbs was the
division manager. Fred Eimer was his deputy. And,
gosh, who was the section manager? Shortly after
that, Luke Kaplan came on board as the section
manager. I think at the time this actually
happened, it was probably either Herb Trostle or
John Porter. Alright, so you got this 16-inch, and
where'd you put it? We looked at several
possibilities. I talked to Ira Bowen, and he had
agreed that we could use a site just north of the
100-inch dome on Mount Wilson. But, of course, we
would have been distinctly visitors, and he said
that their facilities were sufficiently loaded
and water was short, and we'd have to bring in
everything that we wanted to use and stay in the old
Mount Wilson Hotel and what have you. We looked at
Chileo, but we looked longest and hardest and
finally went in to Table Mountain because the
Smithsonian was just moving out. They had done
solar constant work there for some... 25 or 30
years I guess there were primitive facilities
there already and the Forest Service was happy to
have someone take over the site so we and of course
we had seeing studies as well for the site since it
had been one of the areas where Caltech had looked
as a possible site for the 200 inch reflector and
they found that it was as good as Palomar from the
point of view of astronomical seeing And at that
time, from the point of view of city lights, but it
was very close to the San Andreas Fault. So they
went to Palomar instead of to Table Mountain. But
we had all those seeing studies, and we knew it was a
good site. So we grabbed it.
Who were the early people that were hired on? I
guess Highspinrad was one of the earliest to come
in after you formed your astronomical section.
Highspinrad, Bob Youngkin. Yourself, Ron Shorn,
were the first people that were involved. We hired
a man by the name of Charles Cape, and he went by the
name Chick, who would actually act as the on-site
manager, supervisor, holder of hands, repairer
of problems, and so on at the mountain. I know where
High and I came from. Do you remember where Bob
Youngkin came from? He was actually working on his
doctorate at UCLA at the time. And he was married,
family, and needed to work. And so he was just
working on his doctorate in his spare time. And he
did finally finish it years later. I guess you got
interested in planetary astronomy right from the
start, right? From the Sunday supplement? That's
true. Although when I was a student at Caltech, my
work and my interests lay mostly in galactic
structure and cosmology. And my published work
there, a major paper that I did, was on the RR Lyrae
variables in NGC 4147, published in the AJ the year
I came to work at the lab. But here of course the
interest was in planetary and i loved astronomy
generally so i at that time it was easily possible
for a person to know everything there was to know
about the field of solar system astronomy quite
unlike today and so i just sort of made myself a
universalist on the solar system uh back say in
1958 or 1960 uh your opinion Did real, quote
unquote, astronomers look down on planetary
types? Very much so. Did you feel inferior? Not
really, no. Because you were working on planets. I
didn't think so. I thought that most of the
attitude that astronomers had was because of a few
unfortunate articles of people who tended to
follow Percival Lowell's school of study of Mars
and that The Sunday supplements, in fact, even
though one is what attracted me to the field, had
given the people who were interested in the solar
system a bad name. But if one looked, one found
people like G.P. Kuiper, who was doing good,
reputable work. Of course, the people at Mount
Wilson, like Dunham and Adams and Nicholson and
Pettit, had done good work, solid physical,
astrophysical work on the planets throughout the
30s. And Kuiper picked it up in the 40s. And it was a
perfectly good, honest field. It's just that it
had gotten a little bit of a bad rep that people who
didn't know too much about it tended to look at the
infamous Lowellian school of the solar system
instead of the solid physical work. Do you think
planetary astronomy and planetary astronomers
are considered respectable today by the other
astronomers? I think very much so. I do not feel
today that they draw any distinction as to the
quality of a person because he works in the field of
solar system research rather than in stellar or
galactic research. I think that most modern
astronomers probably feel that this study may not
be quite as fundamental shall we say as studying
the big bang or trying to solve some of the what they
consider basic problems of the first few seconds
of the universe or the missing mass or or the great
attractor or the great celestial voids or what
have you but i don't think they They probably look
at it as sort of a different field, almost like
biology and chemistry are a different field, not
necessarily inferior, but just different and not
as interesting to them. Again, back when you got
started doing this, say around 1960, what was
planetary astronomy like in the U.S.? It was
almost non-existent. Really, G.P. Kuiper... was
the only one who was doing modern physical
observing of the planets at that particular time
that I can think of off the top of my head. We had a
very few people in celestial mechanics, about six
of them, I think. We had Clements and Brower and
Hergott and Herbig, not Herbig, Robbie,
Herrick, the other one I was trying to think of.
That was just about it. Brown of the lunar theory
was dead by then. And in fact, there were so few
people even who knew celestial mechanics that
when the space program hit, the lab started
shipping people en masse back to a special summer
school that Dirk Brouwer held at Yale to teach
people what celestial mechanics was all about.
The subject wasn't even taught at Caltech, for
example.
Where do you think planetary astronomy would be
now if it wasn't for the money NASA has spent in the
last 30 years? Obviously it would be a very, very
different field. I don't think If we didn't have
the space program, I think there would still be a
few isolated individuals who would study the
planets from time to time. Any time you get new
techniques, new instruments, new equipment,
somebody's going to apply them to the obvious
objects that are near at hand, like the planets.
But I don't think it would have, well, much of our
knowledge has clearly been found by the space
probes, possibly
I don't know, maybe a quarter as much of it has been
found from the ground. And I don't think there
would have been but a fraction of that if it hadn't
been for NASA and the space program. I think the
interest would not have been there. The people
wouldn't have been attracted to the field. The
telescopes wouldn't have been available for this
less interesting work, less fundamental work, as
it were. I think it's no question that NASA and the
coming space program changed the whole field. Do
you think that planetary astronomy is a part of
astronomy? Yes, I do. I think that there are many
people in the field whose background is more
geology or meteorology than it is astronomy, but I
think astronomers play a particular role,
especially in the study of objects like comets and
asteroids, the small bodies of the solar system,
where they're still basically not looking at
geological or meteorological processes. And
similarly, with many of the satellites in the
solar system, I think we all have something to
contribute. And one of the interesting things
about modern solar system astronomy is that it
isn't just astronomy, but it's also geology and
meteorology. And I think everybody works
together very well. Back when this stuff started
in the early 60s, You were in a special situation
because JPL is actually a contractor to NASA
through Caltech. And how was astronomy funded at
JPL in those days? Did headquarters give a block
grant to Caltech to be given to JPL to be used as JPL
saw fit? Or did they say exactly what they wanted?
This is in the early 60s when this stuff began. I
was, of course, a very junior person at JPL in those
days. I do not know for sure exactly how it was
funded. I know that initially I simply got my money
from my superiors, and if they thought what I
wanted to do was right, then they found me the money
to do it. So my guess is it was probably a block
grant. I know that when I began building the Table
Mountain Observatory and that I had a... brand, if
you will, although it was not the result of a
proposal. I simply sent a proposal to NASA, as it
were. It wasn't reviewed as they are today, and
they decided if what I proposed to do was
reasonable, and they sent me the money to run the
ground-based astronomy program at Table
Mountain, for example, and to fund a number of
people to work on it and work there. So in that
sense, it was a block grant, not to JPL. It came in
that case to me, and I was responsible for it. But
earlier, it had come to my bosses, So I suppose you
would call that a block grant. It certainly was not
money to an individual to do a specific kind of
work. And how's it done today? Today, of course, it
is very much the individual who is funded. If the
individual leaves, the money goes with him or her.
And that money is on the basis of competitive
proposals to do specific things. And it is... much
today as if you were working in a university going
to NASA or to the NSF for funds. It's a totally
different approach to doing the research. It in
some ways is not as pleasant of course. It was much
easier when if you saw something new and exciting
and interesting you could jump into it without
having to worry about whether this was covered in
your proposal and exactly what you would plan to
do, but I suppose it also left possibilities for
people to not do exactly what was right.
As I recall, back in the early 60s, those of us that
were observing kind of did what we could. There was
so much to do. How is it done today? I mean, does the
section chief or division chief say, we shall
study Pluto this year, and everybody follows, or
since now everybody has to get grants on their own,
do they propose what they want to do? Individuals
propose what they want to do today. I think any
section manager in the science division at JPL who
tried to tell an individual what he had to work on
would sort of be laughed out of town. Unless, of
course, he had money and the individual wanted the
money, then that's something else again. But in
general, left up to the individual today. This is
true to a large extent. However, in times when
billets become tight, then it may be that the lab or
the division or the section may decide that, hey,
we've got to cut back a little bit. And so they may
look at those activities which seem less related
to the flight programs of NASA and of the
laboratory and decide that, let's not say decide,
let's sort of suggest to the person that if he or she
wants to continue in employment at the lab, it
might be better to look for a new field that is more
akin to the needs of the laboratory. However, that
person, of course, if he or she has money, can take
that money and go elsewhere and do it. JPL never did
get a big telescope on Table Mountain. Not really,
no. We tried, of course, and that's a big story in
and of itself. However, in recent years, we did get
from the Air Force the old 48-inch ALT-ALT-AS
telescope that was at Cloudcroft, and this now has
been erected on Table Mountain and, in fact, is
going into regular scheduled observation in
about two weeks. There is also a 40-inch reflector
on Table Mountain that is owned by Pomona College
And the time on that telescope is available, half
of the time is available to people at JPL. What
instrumentation, and also you have a 24-inch, is
that still in operation? 24-inch is very much in
operation. It's been the one instrument that has
produced pretty good science throughout all of
the years that Table Mountain has existed, which
number roughly 30 now. uh well of course the 24 inch
wasn't there initially it came in a few years later
but let's say 25 years yeah it's uh it's has a large
good a spectrograph on it which was heavily used at
first has been more lightly used in recent years
but i guess there are people planning to to bring it
back into full use again there's been a great deal
of photoelectric photometry and uh imaging with
CCDs and prior to that Vidicon type detectors on
the 24 inch. What kind of foci do the 40 inch and 48
inch have that are available? I've never seen the
40 inch. I have no idea what is available there. In
the case of the 48 inch, again, I haven't been on the
mountain now in more than 10 years. I have
information here that I can give you that shows the
exact instrumentation and foci and so on on the
48-inch, but I shouldn't really say off the top of
my head. We'll get to that later. You mentioned
that JPL's attempt to get a decent-sized, a big
telescope of a 100-inch class is a long story.
Let's talk about some of that story. How did the
idea start? Or was it obvious to everyone that you
needed a dedicated planetary telescope? Well, I
think with all of us here, it was obvious to us when
we went out and tried to get time on existing large
telescopes that that time simply was not
available for planetary work. All of the
telescopes were very busy. And even in those days,
there were more astronomers wanting time than
there was time available. And when good young
people could not get time at the major
instruments, it was pretty obvious that we needed
a major instrument of our own. And I couldn't say
that any one person was responsible for that idea.
It was a very obvious one. If you can't get the time
you need, you better build your own. And that, in
fact, was what was suggested by people like Ira
Bowen, who was then the director at Mount Wilson.
And he, in fact, helped a great deal in pushing NASA
into the idea that they needed to build their own
telescope for planetary astronomy. He certainly
agreed that there was still a great deal of good,
solid astrophysical work on the planet that could
be done with modern equipment. He was, I think, a
very honest, straightforward, actually rather
far-thinking individual who recognized the fact
that there was a great deal left to be done from the
ground. And he gave a lot of good advice to NASA,
suggesting that they should go ahead and build
their own telescope.
I got Homer Newell to sign two things. And one was
for a telescope at McDonald Observatory at the
University of Texas. And one was for what I thought
was going to be a telescope on Table Mountain.
Whatever happened about that time I left
headquarters? Caltech, unfortunately, is what
happened. The feeling was that since we were young
and not well known, and there were a lot of famous
astronomers at Caltech, that this ought to be some
kind of a joint effort between Caltech and JPL.
Unfortunately, what JPL wanted was a good
telescope in a good site that could get to work in a
hurry, doing... astronomical research. What
Caltech wanted was a really new, modern,
earth-shaking telescope in the world's very best
possible site. And their idea was to perhaps do a
five-year seeing survey, and some work was
actually done on that. Telescopes were mounted at
White Mountain, for example, for a time, and We got
information from Berkeley, who had also mounted a
seeing study up there. But they really began
looking for the world's greatest site for a
planetary telescope, thinking that seeing was
all important in planetary detail work. And they
had a very long range plan. I think that what it
finally came down to was that their idea of what
needed to be done and ours were so different, and I
think both Well, NASA also wanted to get on the air,
so to speak. So we could never reach an agreement
with Caltech that we both felt comfortable with
and finally wound up, as I understood it, with the
money going to Hawaii, which of course was a very
superior site, as it turned out. Right, but which
had no astronomers whatsoever except a few solar
types. That's right. Then there was another
project that I guess finally became the infrared
telescope facility in Lunakea, the light bucket.
Do you remember the light? JPL was going to build a
light bucket. How did that get started? Was Frank
Gray involved in that or something like that? I
never knew the details on that one, Ron. I wish I
had. Frank Gray was the assistant section manager
in those days, and he could very well have been
heavily involved in it. But by that time, I was not
heavily involved any longer in the field. I had
pushed hard to build a... I had even the blueprints
in my office for the 84-inch Kitt Peak, which we
were proposing to duplicate to save time. Again,
here was an existing working telescope, and we had
a complete set of blueprints for it, and it would
have been easy and cheap to simply duplicate
everything at Table Mountain. When that money
didn't come, we had preliminary designs for a
48-inch, preliminary designs for a 60-inch.
We got none of those. And when it became obvious the
telescope was going elsewhere, in fact, I got
heavily involved in other areas, in particular in
work on comets and advanced comet missions. And
part of the problem was that I didn't have my Ph.D.,
And at that time, I had a division manager who
didn't go by what you did, but by what your
credentials were. Who was? Robert Magreblian.
And he moved me out of the slot as head of the
astronomy group and put me in charge of a group
which was doing models of the planets for the
projects. And I did that and various advanced
studies. And then from there, I started studying
comet missions, got extremely interested in
comets, and began my own research program in
cometary astrophysics, and started going to
other observatories and working with other
people, and sort of divorced myself from the
astronomy program at JPL. I tried to do some work at
Table Mountain, but it was so ill-funded by the
mid-'70s that we didn't have the manpower to even
keep the auxiliary instrumentation running
properly. And so from the mid-'70s on, I worked on
advanced studies at JPL of comet missions and then
did my own research at other places like Mauna Kea
and later at Lick Observatory. That brings up an
interesting question. Through the 20s and 30s and
40s, when solar system studies in general have a
bad odor about them. It was always legitimate to
study comets. Why? Well, comets, I guess, didn't
have any thoughts on anybody's part about life and
the solar system and a little green man. comets
were simply a phenomenon that had fascinated
mankind throughout history. They were an
interesting astrophysical problem, both as to
their origin and to the way they work. What in the
heck are they? What are they made of? And why do they
behave the way they do? And their problems were
sufficiently enigmatic that they had always
fascinated even the classical stellar
astronomer. And indeed, they remained a subject
that was always considered quite a legitimate one
for study. And it's sort of ironic that the very
objects which did remain of interest to the
classic stellar and galactic astronomer are the
single object to which NASA has never mounted a
mission.
What do you think killed planetary astronomy in
the early part of this century, effectively
killed it? I know some was being done, but if you
look at the journals in 1900 and then you look at
1930, wow, is there a difference. What's the
reason, or reasons? Well, I think there are, to my
way of thinking, off the top of my head, a couple of
things can be said about it. For one thing, large
telescopes became available which gathered a
great deal of light and allowed people to do
high-resolution spectroscopy, to go deep into
the universe studying the extragalactic
nebulae, the galaxies, the expansion of the
universe. These problems were totally
fascinating. But if you wanted to study the
planets with a large telescope, obviously you
didn't get any better resolution with the large
telescopes than you did with much smaller ones
simply because you were atmospheric seeing
limited. People in those days didn't know how much
of that seeing was created locally by
uncontrolled thermal problems, but in any case, a
big telescope wasn't that much better than a
little one for studying the kind of planetary work
that people had traditionally done, which is to
say planetary detail, the kind of thing that
Percival Lowell had done. So they sort of went off
and developed new instrumentation and went off
into the universe. There were always a few people
who remained in the field, including some with the
biggest telescope in the world, 100 inch at that
time. But I think it was the fascination with the
deep space problems and the fact that the big
telescopes couldn't do that much more than the
little ones could in those times on the planets
that allowed the planetary field to simply die. Do
you think NSA headquarters tries to micromanage
scientific projects too much? Well, not in the
individual research particularly. I mean, they
manage it in the sense that they decide how much
money is available for stellar astronomy versus
planetary astronomy versus Earth. And really, if
you look at it, the only reason they support this
research at all is because of the very
complementary way that it blends in with their
spaceflight missions. But their real interest is
in the missions, and they're simply supporting
them with this ground-based research. I think
they don't try to tell an individual what he has to
do. On the other hand, the amount of money that's
available in a given field is certainly a function
of their interest in it and, well, the universe we
live in, why the guy who has the bucks calls the
shots. Do you think over the years the people at
headquarters really knew what was going on in
planetary astronomy or were they playing
catch-up? Well, let's face it, most of them were
not planetary astronomers themselves. There
have been obvious exceptions to that, yourself
among them.
But no person sitting in Washington can really
retain a feel for the work in the field. It's
virtually impossible, to my way of thinking, for a
person with a job in Washington retain a research
program of his own or her own.
The exceptions are very forced. I think if the
people running the programs at headquarters were
handled perhaps the way section managers are in
the science sections at JPL, that is on an
alternating, rotating two-year basis, where
they remained scientists a good part of the time,
but then filled in and devoted a couple of years to
seeing after NASA's interest, maybe that would be
a solution. But it has been my experience that
generally when people go to Washington, The very,
very fine people that often go there simply after a
time become so involved in their own worries about
their programs that they lose any feel for or sight
of the real research and the real interests of the
people in the field actually doing the work.
What do you think the public thinks of planetary
astronomy and astronomy in general? I think
they're fascinated by it, probably for a lot of
wrong reasons. I'm sure that when they think of the
solar system, they're thinking, again, even in
the classic Lowellian sense of little green men,
and there's certainly a lot of fanatics out there
in the UFO field and what have you that have a lot of
interest in this sort of thing, but it's all
misplaced. On the other hand, I think the young
people find... real modern astronomy
fascinating. Obviously, again, they're
somewhat steered in that direction by the Star
Wars and Star Trek kind of phenomenon, but I think
it gives them a healthy interest in science, and I
think they're genuinely interested. I'm not sure
that it's always brought to them in the proper way.
I'm sure that many adults don't understand it at
all, and perhaps poo-poo it, but I think the
younger generation has a genuine interest in
astronomy, both solar system and deep space
astronomy. Do you think planetary astronomers
have done as good a job as they could of putting your
case across to the public and to Congress?
Probably not. Let's face it, scientists in
general are not necessarily salespeople. There
have been a few obviously very good salespeople
for planetary astronomy, like Carl Sagan. And
Carl, I think, usually has done a good job of
selling it, although there Maybe some things that
he's done that weren't in our best interest, but I
think he's a straightforward and honest and
well-meaning guy who's done an awful lot to help
sell the space program to Congress and to the
world. I think we could use a few more, a little
different maybe, but a few more similar people.
But I'm sure that the likes of you and I have not
perhaps done our part and perhaps are not capable
of doing the sales job that needs to be done. Thirty
years ago, there was just an American
Astronomical Society. Now there's a lot of
sub-societies, particularly there's the
Division for Planetary Astronomy, which even has
its own official journal, Icarus. What are these
developments? Do you think on the whole that
they've been good, bad, or just inevitable? I
think they've been good in the sense that it would
have been very difficult for planetary astronomy
to grow if it had remained totally under the thumb
of the parent society. By having its own
organization and its own journal and its own
prizes, why, it could develop as an entity and a
very strong one in its own right. And I think it
would have been almost impossible for this to
happen under the thumb of the parent society.
These days do you think that real quote-unquote
astronomers and planetary astronomers talk to
each other very much? I think they do, maybe not as
much as they should, but there is a very definite
attempt to occasionally hold meetings of the
parent society and the divisions jointly, and to
have prize winners and so on from the divisions
deliver prize lectures at the parent society. I
think there's much more appreciation for each
other today, certainly, than there was 30 years
ago.
The feelings are improving, which isn't to say
that the stellar and galactic astronomers still
don't feel that their field is the real astronomy
and more important than solar system work. And
probably a lot of them tend to lump solar system
astronomers into the class along with geologists
and meteorologists as opposed to being real
astronomers. But I think they respect one another
and are interested in each other's work to an
extent. Okay, for 35 years now, we've been going to
planets and observing them from the ground and
spacecraft and directly. Not a trace of, not a
trace of more fossil of any life anywhere in the
solar system except Earth. In particular, no
trace of life so far on Mars. Do you think that's had
a big effect on the public and on funding? Big
negative effect or not? Oh, boy, that's hard to
say. I think that astronomers never really
expected to find any significant form of life
anywhere in our solar system. I think many,
perhaps most of them, feel that there may be some
form of life elsewhere in the galaxy and certainly
in the universe. It's an awfully big universe for
this to only have happened once. And whether you
think about this from a purely scientific point of
view or even from a religious point of view... Why
should God create such an enormous universe and
only inhabit one teeny tiny mote of it?
And if you look at it from a purely biological
evolutionary point of view, if it happened here,
why can't it have happened somewhere else? So I
think most scientists probably feel somewhere in
the universe there's life, other than here and
here on Earth. But none of us really expected to
find it in the solar system. The public in general
probably did. And some of them may be disappointed
by it. And I think that some of them are put off now,
perhaps, by people trying to oversell programs on
the basis of
looking for life, even though it is still a
legitimate thing to do to see if there's any
evidence, let's say, on Mars of... or of any form of
life ever having existed. This is a legitimate
scientific study like any other, but it's not the
kind of thing that's going to enchant the general
public. They want to see some walking and talking,
or at least growling. A lot of people lately have
been getting a lot of publicity and some money for
studying things like the possibility of planets
around other stars. Killer asteroids, ozone
hole, ozone layer hole, and the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence. Do you think
those people are overdoing it a bit or not? I think
they're all legitimate fields of study. I think
that as virtually every program, they are
oversold in the sense that they are giving love and
motherhood statements, which are their ultimate
goal. The implication is that these programs are
going to be solved with a few bucks in a short period
of time when, in fact, they may not really say that,
but the implication is there. Whereas, in fact,
most of these are very long-range programs. and
are going to have to be followed for many decades to
have any real hope of success. So I think there is a
big tendency on everyone's part to try to
oversell, because with the shortage of funds,
everybody feels they've got almost half to
oversell in order to get funded. And that's
unfortunate. I mean, every one of those programs
is a legitimate program, and it's a legitimate
scientific study. But I think they probably are
oversold in that people tend to think that they're
going to get results cheaper and sooner than they
really are.
What's, in your opinion, what's the state of
planetary astronomy today in this country? Plus,
minus, zero? Well, I'm not sure what you mean by
state. Expanding, idling, sinking. it's sinking
i think i don't think there's any question of that
the funding for planetary astronomy has not
increased for a decade and there's been no real
allowance made for inflation i think there's
enormous pressure from the fact that any
university professor is judged in part by the
number of graduates that he has and the number of
phds that he produces and you've got to figure if
every individual planetary astronomer out there
in a university produces even five or six
students, and most of them, it's probably more
like 10 PhDs in the field during their working
lifetime, you can see how rapidly the number of
people in the field is going to grow, and each of
them in turn then is going to have the same problem
of getting funding and have their own students.
And so you tend to get an exponential growth. And
clearly no field can sustain an exponential
growth for a long period of time. Planetary
astronomy has done it, did it for a couple of
decades. And clearly that has to stop. So there's
tremendous pressure just from there being too
many people today for the funds that are
available. And you might argue that that's good
for the field in that you can claim that the very
best will rise to the top and be funded. But I think
it's not doing any young person a favor to take them
into planetary astronomy today. At least you have
to be honest and explain the facts of life to them
that they're going to have to be awfully good and
work awfully hard if they're to have any real hope
of succeeding in the field. Over the years, what's
JPL's attitude been? Looking at it from the
bottom, looking up, what do you think the
people... Well, what's the impression you got of
what's JPL's quote-unquote attitude towards
planetary astronomy? Necessary evil, an
ornament, or what? I think the attitude at the lab
has always been fairly good. I think they found
astronomers to be useful, well, all planetary
scientists, not just astronomers, but all of the
people in the field to be useful. a useful adjunct
in that they were around to help when questions
came up on the flight projects. And I think the
feeling has been that the science produced here
has been of sufficient quality for JPL to be quite
proud of it. And I think the attitude of senior
management at the lab towards science has always
been good. It's never been, of course, their
fundamental goal. Their fundamental goal has
always been and remains to sell new projects. So
while I think the scientists are respected and
have a place, everybody feels they have a place
here, that place is not going to be allowed to
interfere in any way with the lab's chief goals,
which are to fly missions. Do you think there's
enough support for ground-based work as opposed
to the money spent on probes by NASA?
I have to say no, in a way, in the sense that if you
actually look at the dollars spent on probes
through the last couple of decades and the dollars
spent supporting ground-based work, the amount
of knowledge that we've gained from the
ground-based work is far larger proportionally
than the money spent on it. And as long as that
continues to happen, then one has to argue that
perhaps there should be more funding for the
ground-based work. You're getting more bang for
buck out of the ground-based stuff. Now clearly
there are many things that you cannot do from the
ground. You could never have done without the
probes. And so I'm not arguing to dismantle one in
favor of the other. I'm simply saying that I think
perhaps their balance has always been a little bit
off. They get a lot of good data. And then they have a
brief research and analysis program on that data.
And before the treasure trove that they've gained
with a probe is really worked out, the research
program is cut off, and they go on to something
else. And I think that's short-sighted. And I
think, similarly, the actual support of
ground-based observations has been a little
lacking in, well, I think the balance is a little
off. Let me put it that way.